My goal is to come up with a **_sharding scheme_** that has a _**high collation rate**_, without sending every collation to the main chain. This to _**save on gas**_ and get _**better scaling**_.

The idea is to let the validators create a chain of collations _**off-chain**_ and only send a combination header containing all off-chain collations once every X collations. Note that you still want to publish the header on a regular basis for cross shard communication and finality.

**Building the collation chain**
The order of the validators is known in advance and a validator is only allowed to build an off-chain collation on top of a collation of his direct predecessor. If lot of validators in row participate we can build a long collation-chain. Every participator in the chain is allowed to send the combination header to the main chain at any time. We want to avoid that a validator sends an older version to the main chain, so all participators have to sign the latest combination header to let them commit not to send any older headers. 

**Skipping validators**
If a validator does not participate or is offline, one participant of the collation-chain sends the combination header to to main chain. If the non-participating validator does not send a collation header within a certain number of blocks, the next in line validator can send its header to the main chain and the non-participating validator is skipped. After that, the validators can start building a new collation-chain off-chain. A validator is allowed to skip previous validators that have not send a header to the chain, but has to wait a certain number of blocks per skipped validator. This waiting period per validator is a few factors longer than the off-chain collation interval, so the off-chain collation-chain builders do not have to worry about being skipped.

**Attack by censoring**
An attacker could try to revert a collation-chain by censoring the combination header transaction for a long enough period to be able to send a header and skip all participants.
As an extra safety measure, it is possible for a combination header to revert collations headers on the main chain from the validators that skipped the collation-chain builders as long as the collation-chain contains more collations than the number of reverted collation headers. 
Because we do not allow building an off-chain collation-chain on top of a collation header that might be reverted and there is a minimum block interval between headers, we give the censored validators more time to get their combination header confirmed and withstand the attack.