See previous work: https://ethresear.ch/t/censorship-rejection-through-suspicion-scores/305

See also as background: https://vitalik.ca/general/2018/08/07/99_fault_tolerant.html

We can use the 99% fault tolerant consensus algorithm described above by having it constantly run "in the background", to create a consensus on what data was broadcasted at what times, and therefore what data the main chain is maliciously failing to include.

Using old finalized blockchain state as a source of validators and entropy, we agree on a sequence of validators, `V[1]`, `V[2]`....., where each validator is assigned to a slot (eg. of 1 minute length). Let `[G + D * x, G + D * (x+1)]` be the time interval associated with slot `x`. At time `G + D * (k * 100)`, any validator in `V[k * 100] ... V[k * 100 + 99]` can publish a message `(h, sig(h))` for any hash `h` of a block that they saw in the previous interval of 100 * D seconds. Over the next 100 periods, the 99% fault tolerant consensus protocol runs: any validator in that set, upon receiving a value `v` with `n` signatures with some hash `h` that they did not yet sign off on, checks if the time is less than `G + D * (k * 100 + n)`, and if it is then it publishes `(v, sig(v))` with their own signature.

Clients watching this process accept a block with hash `h` as having been published within a given slot if they see the block and they see a message with `n` signatures before time `G + D * (k * 100 + n - 0.5)`. There is a proof (see blog post) that, if the network latency assumption is correct, clients will agree on which blocks were published during what interval. Now, we can socially agree on a definition of "censorship" (eg. if a block was published during interval `k`, and was not included in a chain that was published after interval `k+1`, then that chain is censoring that block), and coordinate on rejecting majority chains that are censoring, and coordinate on a minority soft fork to get around the attack.